covid data post (#685)
ropensci/roweb2: content/blog/2020-05-19-covid-19-open-data/index.Rmd

# twitterImg: blog/2019/06/04/post-template/name-of-image.png
output: 
  html_document:
    keep_md: true
---

The COVID-19 pandemic has dramatically impacted all of our lives in a very short period of time. 
Spring and summer are usually very busy as students prepare to go the field to engage in various data collection efforts. 
The pandemic has also disrupted these carefully planned activities as travel is suspended and local and remote field stations have closed indefinitely. 
A lost field season can be a major setback for a dissertation timeline and students will have to improvise. 
One promising opportunity to continue research efforts during these unprecedented times is taking advantage of the massive amounts of open scientific data that are freely available. 
Open data can form the basis of a review, synthesis, or new research.

Inspired by [tweets from Ethan White][] about "PhD research from a distance", the rOpenSci team did an in-depth exploration of how we provide access to open data. 
Our goal is to inspire students to find research opportunities with open data and highlight some of the rOpenSci packages that already make programmatic access possible. 

> We also highlight some examples of how specific collections of packages are being used right now in fields such as archaeology and climate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We also highlight some examples of how specific collections of packages are being used right now in fields as varied as archaeology and climate.
```

### Exploring open data

Data are fundamental to scientific discovery and leveraging new discoveries would not be possible without access to data [^1]. 
Although people rarely develop new research entirely on open data, these datasets provide an opportunity to reproduce and validate existing results, improve models, and be combined with other data to generate new syntheses. 
The open science movement has been growing for over a decade and all of that interest has surfaced numerous databases and repositories. The growing interest in reproducibility has also led to the creation of a plethora of open source software to access such data. 
rOpenSci's core mission is to develop such tools and to date we have built over 120 robust data-access packages. 

> Although it is impossible to thoroughly quantify the amount of data available through rOpenSci's packages, some of the stats we are able to glean are impressive. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These packages provide access to an impressive variety and quantity of data:  
```

eBird offers up 700 million observations, Crossref has 108 million records of scholarly works which include articles and books, Dryad makes available 13 terabytes of data associated with published papers, and GBIF has over 1.3 billion records of species worldwide. 
  

> We hope that this post and list of tools provides inspiration for you to explore new data sources and chapter ideas. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We hope that this post and these tools provide inspiration for you to explore new data sources and research topics. 
```

> Many of rOpenSci's tools are developed by practicing scientists and have strong communities behind them. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

### Data sources for your research

> We invited a few university faculty and researchers to highlight some sources of open data for research in their fields. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many of rOpenSci's tools are developed by practicing scientists and have strong communities behind them. We invited university faculty from our community of developer-researchers to highlight sources of open data for research in their fields. 
```

The COVID-19 pandemic has disrupted transport patterns worldwide. This has led to changes, such as the construction of 'pop-up' active transport infrastructure, the prioritisation of which can be supported by reproducible and open data analysis, as outlined in preprint (the analysis of which was undertaken in R) on the topic [^3].
There is a wealth of data out there that can be found with careful search queries and many new datasets (like [Uber's micromobility datasets][], released on May 6th of this year).

- For downloading data representing transport networks, I recommend heading to the [overpass website][] and for R users checking out [osmdata][] and the in-development geofabric (to be renamed) R packages.

- For open origin-destination data there are many resources but the [PCT][] package provides a way to access national-scale datasets quickly from the R command line, as outlined [stplanr][]'s [Origin-destination vignette][].

- For road safety data there is a lack of open data in many countries but you can access national road casualty data, with 60+ variables and 100,000+ records each year with the [stats19][] package.

> - For links to additional resources I recommend [Chapter 12 of Geocomputation with R][] and [Chapter 11 of QGIS for tansport researchers][].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- For links to additional resources I recommend [Chapter 12 of Geocomputation with R][] and [Chapter 11 of QGIS for transport researchers][].
```
